Excelsior Upgrade Utility
Version 1.0 -> Version 2.0
--------------------------

The UPGRADE program supplied with this release of Excelsior Phase One will
allow you to do the following:

    - Convert saved games
    - Convert your system configuration files
    - Maintain your registration status

There are a few important points to keep in mind before starting this
procedure:

    - Do NOT delete version 1.0 from your hard drive until you have
      completed the upgrade process.  Do NOT install version 2.0 in the
      same directory as version 1.0.

    - If you used the REGISTER program to generate a registration code for
      your copy of Excelsior, the generated code will no longer be valid.
      You must run the REGISTER program supplied with the new version to get
      a new code.

    - If you sent in your registration code generated by version 1.0 but
      have not yet received a counter-code, you have two choices:
        1.  Do not upgrade to version 2.0 until you get the counter-code
            from  Castle Software.  When it arrives, register your copy of
            version 1.0 and then use the UPGRADE program to upgrade to v2.0.
            Your registration will then be retained.
        2.  Upgrade to v2.0 now, re-run REGISTER, and send in the new code.
            We will supply you with a new counter-code at no charge.


UPGRADE INSTRUCTIONS
--------------------

To begin the upgrade process, run the UPGRADE program.  The program will
begin by asking you to enter the full directory and pathname to version 1.0.
It will then verify that all of the necessary files are present to perform
the upgrade.  If any are missing, you will be notified and the process will
terminate.

If the program detects that you were using a SoundBlaster card in version
1.0 of Excelsior, it will prompt you to enter the port address and IRQ which
your soundcard uses.  Enter these two values if you know them.  If you wish
to change the settings, you can use the new -SB command line option when
running Excelsior.  Consult the reference manual for a detailed description
of this procedure.

Next, the program will automatically convert your saved games from version
1.0 to 2.0.  Any saved games which you may have already saved with version
2.0 will be erased by this procedure, so be certain that there are no save
files in the version 2.0 directory which you want. (Files starting with SAVE)

After all save files are converted, the program will check to see if your
copy of version 1.0 was registered.  If so, it will transfer your
registration to version 2.0.

At this point, the upgrade procedure is complete.  You can now run the
new version of Excelsior and continue from where you left off!  Enjoy!

If you experience any trouble, please contact Castle Software at:

                Castle Software
                6755 Mira Mesa Blvd.  #123-258
                San Diego, CA  92121

or via E-mail at either:

                danberke@netcom.com  (preferred)
                Compuserve:  73150,551


